All of you are humble people.
If you weren't, you'd never have been invited to Gilead.
Have you ever noticed, though, that where humility is concerned, we do well in some situations,
not so well in others?
For example, if someone commends us for a good job on a talk on the midweek meeting or
perhaps a comment on the watchtower study, we give all credit to Jehovah and to the training
we've received, and that's good.
But in other situations, we might get into trouble.
In other situations, our humility might be put to the test.
Now at Bethel, as has been mentioned on this program already, we all work with people.
We all work closely with others, as some of you sisters work on a team.
You work with others, and you brothers, you all have responsibilities in the congregation
or at Bethel or perhaps both.
But in all situations, humility is needed.
So I thought that this morning we might consider what we can learn about humility from Jehovah
and from the apostles of Jesus Christ.
Now, humility is a broad term.
So let's narrow it down a little bit.
Let's consider a couple of aspects of humility.
And the first one I'm going to mention might surprise you.
A insight on the Scriptures tells us that humility includes the ability to show mercy
and compassion to others.
The ability to show mercy and compassion to others.
The ability to make exceptions where that is warranted.
Well, that's Jehovah, isn't it?
Jehovah isn't rigid.
Jehovah knows when to make exceptions.
How often did you read in the Bible as you went through?
Jehovah reconsidered.
Jehovah makes perfect rules.
And yet at times he reconsideres.
Now let's illustrate.
These lights are getting ready to conquer the promised land.
And the first up is the city of Jericho.
Now there's a rule, a rule of engagement, and it's very clear.
Jehovah says, you must not make any covenant with them
or show them any favor.
No covenant, no favor, that's the rule.
It's a perfect rule because it's Jehovah's rule.
Joshua sent two spies into the city,
and they went to the home of a prostitute named Rahab.
Now wait a minute.
Let's think about that.
Pretty easy to say, isn't it?
Joshua sent two spies into the city.
They went into a house of a prostitute named Rahab.
Now we often think about the faith of Rahab.
But what about the faith of those two spies?
Can you imagine the faith that it took for those men?
The Bible says they were young men to go into that city.
Now if they were under 40 years of age,
they were born in the wilderness.
How many cities had they ever seen?
Had they ever seen a city before?
How many actual houses had they entered?
How many foreigners had they ever met?
Maybe not very many.
Maybe a couple on the other side of the Jordan,
but not very many.
So now, as soon as they enter the city, what happens?
Someone calls the police.
They're recognized right away.
And no wonder, first of all, they
weren't dressed like canonites.
You couldn't order your clothes from Amazon.
And those days, you know, they were dressed like Israelites.
They probably had on 40-year-old hand-me-downs
from their fathers who had died in the desert.
So they didn't look like canonites.
They didn't blend in.
And as soon as they opened their mouth,
people would say, you're not from around here, are you?
You don't speak the canonite language.
So no wonder they were discovered.
They had to get off the street.
They had to get out of sight.
And you wonder if Jehovah directed them to rehab.
You wonder if Jehovah saw something in rehab, something
in her heart that he could work with.
Or do you believe that it was a coincidence
that the spies were led to the only family in Jericho
that was worth saving?
It could be that Jehovah was involved with that.
Well, rehab decides that she's going to hide the spies,
but she has a condition.
And if you'd like to turn to judges,
or Joshua, or rather, chapter two,
we'll see what that condition was.
I'll give you a moment.
We're going to read that Joshua, chapter two, and verse 13.
This is rehab.
No, we don't know how she communicated with them.
Must have been a lot of sign language.
We heard about sign language a minute ago.
Must have been a lot of sign language going on
because the Canaanite language wasn't quite like Hebrew,
you know, but anyway, somehow they got the point across.
And here's what she says in verse 13.
You must spare the lives of my father and mother,
my brothers and sisters, and all who belong to them.
And you must save us from death.
What's she asking for?
She's asking for an exception.
There's a rule.
You must not make any covenant with them.
You must not show them any favor.
And she's asking for an exception,
and quite a broad exception.
She's asking not just for her own life,
but for the lives of all of her family members, as well some,
might have thought that she was pushing it.
But she asked for that.
And the spies showed favor to Rahab.
They made an exception.
And they promised that when the time came,
a Rahab and her family would be spared.
The Bible doesn't criticize the spies
for making that exception.
So it may be that Jehovah had something to do with it.
Maybe Jehovah moved the spies in that direction.
Maybe Jehovah saw something in Rahab
that he wanted to save.
Now later on, Joshua and the elders,
they didn't follow instructions,
and they made a covenant with the Ghiblianites.
And the Bible does mention that,
but it doesn't mention this when it comes to the spies here.
They made the exception,
and we do know that Jehovah agreed with that exception.
How do we know that?
Because when he made the walls of Jericho fall,
he preserved the section of the wall
where Rahab's family lived.
Jehovah agreed to an exception to his perfect rule.
Now you know where I'm going with this.
We need rules.
And most of the time a rule will satisfy our needs.
But in a few cases, it only makes sense
to make an exception to the rule.
I'm reminded of the time not too long ago
when the Bethel family moved out of Brooklyn.
Now there were a lot of Bethelites
in the congregations who were elders
and ministerial servants,
and so a massive reorganization of congregations
was necessary in New York City.
And the elders and the circuit overseers
had to make sure that each congregation
had a balanced number of elders, ministerial servants
and publishers, and so publishers were assigned
to various congregations.
Can you imagine hundreds of thousands of assignments
that had to be made?
And so there was a rule,
and it was a pretty good rule,
and the rule was, go where you're assigned.
We don't have time to consider the personal feelings
about every publisher in New York City,
so please go where you're assigned.
That was the rule.
Now there were two sisters, single sisters,
who were assigned to a congregation.
They didn't have a car,
and you couldn't reach the congregation
they were assigned to by public transportation.
And so they were going to have to walk to the kingdom hall,
and the area where the kingdom hall was located
was very dangerous.
Their safety would have been involved.
Well, you had a rule, go where you're assigned,
but the circuit overseer lovingly made an exception.
So the point is, we do need rules.
And most of the time, our rules, even our imperfect rules,
will serve most of the brothers, but let's use common sense.
And there are times when we have to consider an exception.
Now can you think of anyone who was grateful
that Jehovah made an exception for Rahab,
and she didn't die a Jericho?
Can you think of someone?
He was mentioned in this program, Boaz, the husband of Ruth.
Rahab was his mother.
And think of this, if Rahab had died in Jericho,
would there ever have been a David?
Let's go on.
Jehovah directed that seven nations in Canaan
were to be eliminated.
And the Ghiblianites were among them, but they had a plan.
They pretended to be from a far off nation
that wasn't slated for destruction.
And so the elders, not consulting Jehovah,
they made a vow that the Ghiblianites would be spared.
They made a covenant with the Ghiblianites.
Well, it wasn't long, but what the Israelites realized
they'd been tricked.
But even though their oath had been obtained
under false pretenses,
they agreed to keep their word.
But it's what happens next that's interesting.
Five kings of the Amorites find out that the Israelites
and the Ghiblianites have made a covenant,
and they are furious.
And so they are determined to kill all the Ghiblianites,
which was really what Jehovah had intended in the first place.
What did Jehovah do?
He could have said, well, that solves your problem.
You promised the Ghiblianites that you
wouldn't put them to death,
so you can sit back and let the Amorites through the job.
But what did Jehovah do?
Joshua chapter 10 and verse eight.
Now remember, he had had a rule.
It had a rule that everyone was to be destroyed.
Joshua chapter 10 and verse eight.
Jehovah then said to Joshua,
do not be afraid of them.
For I have handed them over to you.
Not one of them will be able to stand against you.
Imagine this humility.
Jehovah helps the Israelites to keep a promise
they had no business making.
That is humility.
Well, let's talk about Jesus apostles.
We can really learn humility from them as well.
Now we often talk about the disputes they had,
but mostly that was before Pentecost.
When you think about it, after Pentecost,
it was a different story.
What do we find about the apostles after Pentecost?
Well, they weren't interested in taking credit for things
and they weren't searching for the limelight.
They were really a very self-effacing the apostles.
Matthew wrote the first inspired book,
the first inspired history of Jesus Christ.
Do we see Matthew's picture on every other page?
Matthew giving a public talk.
Matthew performing a miracle.
Matthew shepherding.
No.
His name is only mentioned twice in the whole gospel.
And both times, he describes himself as a tax collector,
not a very flattering portrayal.
And what about the apostle John?
The name John appears 23 times in his gospel,
but it never refers to the apostle John.
It almost always refers to John the Baptist.
When the apostles and older men met
to consider the matter of circumcision,
was that an important meeting?
Would you agree that that was a landmark meeting?
The apostles and older men are there who presided.
Which of the twelve was jockeying for position?
James, the brother of Jesus,
not he wasn't even an apostle.
He's the one who presided.
And then later on when the decision was made,
who announced the decision?
Again, James, you don't find Peter or John saying,
well, you know, this is a pretty important decision.
We think that one of us should announce it.
The apostles had learned their lesson.
Well, remember that when the circuit overseer visits.
Now you may have heavy responsibilities at Bethel.
But when he visits the congregation,
he's in charge that week.
Follow his direction.
Don't be critical of the circuit overseer.
And don't be afraid to let him know
how much you appreciate his service.
And you know, our Bethel families here in the United States
are such a wonderful example of that.
When the circuit overseers first visit a Bethel congregation,
they're a little bit nervous for about 10 minutes.
But the Bethel family shows that they appreciate so much
the council.
And sometimes they talk about the circuit overseer's council
for weeks after his visit.
They really, deeply appreciate the visit of the circuit overseer
and they respect that man.
And we know that you're going to do the same.
Humble people are happy to contribute to the kingdom work
any way they can, just so they can contribute.
They're not hung up on privileges.
They're not hung up on prestige or on position.
They don't seek the limelight.
And in this regard, we're going to talk a little bit
about the Apostle Paul.
Now, Brother Lippold mentioned in his talk that Paul
was not a man to boast.
And that's quite true.
Actually, Paul was a very humble man.
Now think about this.
At the time, Paul was converted about 34 CE.
Jesus told Ananias that Paul was going to have
a wonderful privilege.
Let's read about it.
Acts chapter 9, Acts chapter 9 and verse 15, Acts 9 and 15.
And this is Jesus to Ananias, but the Lord said to him,
go, because this man is a chosen vessel to me,
to bear my name to the nations, as well as to kings
and to the sons of Israel, a chosen vessel.
How about that?
How did Paul react?
Did he let that go to his head?
Did he immediately go up to Jerusalem and volunteer
to be on the governing body, saying, well, now that I'm
anointed, I can be on the governing body?
No.
He stayed where he was in Damascus,
and he kept preaching the good news.
Now in 36 CE, he did go up to world headquarters in Jerusalem.
And how did he react?
Did he say, here I am, the chosen vessel.
I'm here to help you run the place.
He stayed with the Apostle Peter for a couple of weeks.
Apparently, Peter had moved to Jerusalem, but he kept preaching.
He just put his head to the ground and he kept preaching
the good news until one day Jesus appeared to him
when Paul was in the temple.
And he told Paul that he had to leave Jerusalem immediately
because the Jews were out to kill him.
How did Paul react?
Did he say, but the governing body is going to meet me?
If I leave, how will they manage without me?
They need my wisdom.
Paul obeyed theocratic direction.
And he left.
He accepted a new assignment.
Tarsus.
What kind of assignment is that for a chosen vessel?
It was out in the boondocks.
It was 500 miles from the governing body in Jerusalem.
How would the governing body get to know his wonderful qualities
if he was 500 miles from Jerusalem?
Paul went to Tarsus and he kept preaching.
We don't even know if there was a congregation of Tarsus
when Paul got there, but Paul kept preaching.
I was thinking of the lovely interview we just heard
where the brother talked about how he eventually ended up
in the circuit work.
But before that time, Jehovah gave him a little training.
And perhaps that's what happened to the Apostle Paul.
Do you know that Paul may have remained in Tarsus
for eight years preaching?
And then Barnabas came along.
11 years after Paul's conversion,
Barnabas came along and invited him to Antioch.
And for that time, Paul started to have privileges.
And five years after that, Paul wrote his first inspired letter
that we cherish to this day.
Paul worked hard all his life.
He did more than any of the twelve apostles,
but he was never upset that he wasn't counted among them.
Paul appreciated the privileges he had.
He viewed them as undeserved kindness,
and we know that your brothers and sisters
are going to do the same.
Are you invited to conduct a meeting for Field Service?
Treasure the privilege.
Any privilege that you receive,
treasure it, has an expression of love from Jehovah.
Well, when you go to your assignments,
many situations are going to test your humility.
And I know that your brothers and sisters
are going to pass the test.
The branch asks you to work on a project.
And deep down, you don't quite agree with it.
Deep down, you really wonder if it's going to work.
And you wonder if it's not going to be a waste of your time.
But you're not going to put it on the back burner
and say, well, I'll get to it someday if I get time.
You're not going to do that.
You're going to put heart and soul into the project.
You're going to pray to Jehovah to bless the project,
the project that you didn't quite agree with.
Or if you're asked to make a recommendation,
and you favor one option over another, humility
is going to move you to present all of the options,
all of the pros and cons equally.
You're not going to slant things, thinking, well, you know,
I'm going to have to help these brothers
to make this decision.
So I'll put a really heavy weight on the pros,
and I'm going to make it really light on the cons.
Don't do that.
I know that you're going to present everything, honestly.
And you're going to recognize that it's
the Holy Spirit that helps brothers to make decisions.
Trust the Spirit to move the brothers,
to do the right thing.
Suppose you sisters are working on a team,
or you brothers are working on a body of elders.
I know that not even in your heart of hearts,
you're going to think that you have the best judgment
on the team, and that, well, you can listen politely
to the expressions of others.
But really, yours is the only sensible conclusion.
And we hope that the brothers and sisters
are going to go along with us.
You're not going to think that because nobody's right
all the time.
Jehovah's Spirit can work on any member of the team.
Don't get discouraged.
If every suggestion you make in a meeting,
get shot down.
It happens to the best of us.
And there will be other meetings.
And hopefully, some of them will go better for you.
Don't get discouraged.
And don't decide, well, I'm not going to say anything anymore.
I'm not going to contribute anymore.
Be humble.
And recognize that at times, we may make suggestions
that don't make very much sense.
I certainly appreciate the kind way
the governing body deals with me
with some of my lame brain suggestions.
In your comments and your assignments
on the midweek meeting, use the knowledge
you've gained at Gellied to build up.
And I know you won't proofread the meetings.
I don't think that was a good illustration.
That scripture wasn't applied right.
That isn't the right word.
You won't do that.
Just sit back, relax, and enjoy the meetings.
Take in the spiritual food.
Rejoice in whatever the brothers and sisters
have prepared for you.
Well, I haven't told you anything.
You don't already know you're all humble people.
These are just reminders that all of us need.
All of us are humble most of the time.
We pray for the day when we'll be humble all of the time.
And in the meantime, let's work on it, you and I.
Let's work on it together.
Let's follow the course of humility.
If we do, we'll continue to be used by Jehovah.
We love you.
May Jehovah bless you richly.